===========================
  atocha: 10-min Tutorial
===========================

:Abstract:

   A short and sweet overview and tutorial to teach the flavour of what the
   Atocha library provides for the web developer.

:FIXME: Complete this before release!


Form Definition
---------------

You create a single ``Form`` instance for both rendering and handling of the
form.  The form consists of "fields", which are akin to desktop application
widgets, which automatically return an appropriate data type for the value
entered by the user::

  (FIXME add example.)

Form Rendering
--------------

You then use this form object, in collboration with a ``FormRenderer`` to render
the page to the user::

  (FIXME add example.)

This can be heavily customized by breaking down the process in its component
phases, which lets you decide on the particular layout of the widgets if
desired::

  (FIXME add example.)

The form rendering process is decoupled from the form definition so it is
possible to create custom form renderers for your particular system or with
specific layout characteristics, without changing the library.


Form Handling
-------------

A ``FormParser`` is used to oversee the process of parsing and validating
user-submitted inputs.  Most of the basic validation is automatic, and depends
on the types of the fields in the form.  Since part of the validation can only
be implemented on the client-side--there is always some kind of custom code that
needs be used there--, the parser allows you to invoke methods to signal errors
and to indicate completion of the parsing.  This establishes a protocol in which
you can customize validation (another pattern involves attaching validators to
the widgets, but we think it is more limited and complicated than the simple
protocol that we offer)

When the parsing is complete, the parser either redirects automatically to the
submitter resource if necessary, with the accumulated errors for rendering the
annotated form back to the user, or contains the final parsed values for client
perusal::

  (FIXME add example.)


Form Values Display
-------------------

The form object can also be used to display parsed values in a table, without
editing.  This is simply accomplished by using a special display-only renderer
on the form, instead of the normal renderer which renders inputs. This is useful
because much of the presentation information is already present in the form
definition::

  (FIXME add example.)

